This document includes a Wikipedia page about Kongsberg.

Kongsberg Gruppen

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Kongsberg Gruppen ASA

Company type Allmennaksjeselskap

Traded as Oslo Stock Exchange: KOG

ISIN NO0003043309

Industry Shipbuilding, defense, aerospace, offshore oil and gas industries.

Founded March 20, 1814; 211 years ago

Headquarters Kongsberg, Norway

Area served Global

Key people Geir Håøy (CEO)

Products Ships, missiles, remote controlled weapon stations

Revenue Increase 27.4 billion kr (2021)

Operating income Increase 2.86 billion kr (2021)

Net income Decrease 2.16 billion kr (2021)

Total assets Increase 39.3 billion kr (2021)

Total equity Increase 13.6 billion kr (2021)

Number of employees 11,122 (2021)

Subsidiaries

    Kongsberg Maritime
    Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace
    Kongsberg Digital

Website www.kongsberg.com

Kongsberg Gruppen is a Norwegian multinational company, that supplies high-technology systems to customers in the merchant marine, defence, aerospace, offshore oil and gas industries, and renewable and utilities industries.

In 2018, Kongsberg had revenues of NOK 14.381 billion, and 6,842 employees in more than 25 countries. The company is headquartered in Kongsberg.

It comprises Four business areas:

    Kongsberg Maritime
    Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace
    Kongsberg Discovery
    Kongsberg Digital

Kongsberg is a continuation of Kongsberg Weapons Factory (Kongsberg Våpenfabrikk - KV) (1814–1987). After KV's restructuring in 1987 following the Toshiba–Kongsberg scandal, defence activities continued as the company Norsk Forsvarsteknologi (NFT). In 1995 the company changed its name to Kongsberg Gruppen.

Kongsberg was listed on the Oslo Stock Exchange in 1993 and is a public company. The Norwegian Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries is the largest shareholder with a 50.001 percent interest.

Markets outside of Norway pose a growing and increasingly important part of business and represented approximately 80% of revenue in 2015.

History

The company's origin and background dates back to the early 1600s.

The discovery of silver in the mountains around Kongsberg in 1624 meant that the city became an important mineral resource for the Danish Norwegian kingdom. When the Danish-Norwegian union was dissolved about 200 years later there was a need to build up a strong defence that would contribute to independence and security for Norway.

There was a need for a domestic defence industry, and Kongsberg already had expertise after centuries of mining. On 20 March 1814 Poul Steenstrup founded Kongsberg Våpenfabrikk.

1813–1890: Origins

1813 was an important year for Norway. The nation wrote its constitution and the weapons factory was one of the nation's first industrial factories.

Kongsberg Silver Mines experienced a recession and as a consequence Kongsberg suffered distress and poverty. There was a need to create new jobs. In addition Norway was marked by the desire for national independence, and the Weapons factory would make the newly established state self-supplied with weapons.

Kongsberg's mining traditions - established over several centuries - provided a good basis for building a knowledge-based business. Skilled mining engineers were now assigned to develop the new company.

The Weapons Factory quickly began producing rifles for the Norwegian Armed Forces. A number of models were developed and delivered throughout the 19th century. The major international breakthrough came in 1888 when director Ole Herman Johannes Krag and corps gunsmith Erik Jørgensen showcased a new type of rifle.

1890–1900: International breakthrough

International breakthrough came with the Krag–Jørgensen rifle in 1892.

The officer Ole Herman Johannes Krag and gunsmith Erik Jørgensen wanted to produce a new type of precision rifle, which was both easy to use, inexpensive to manufacture and which had revolutionary functionality. The rifle's mechanism proved to be something quite revolutionary in the arms industry.

The Krag–Jørgensen rifle was first adopted as a service rifle by the Danish Army in 1889. Three years later the rifle became a world-known concept when the United States decided to equip their soldiers with the rifle. "The Krag" turned out to be one of the first major export contracts for the Norwegian industry. During a six-year period the U.S. alone produced well over half a million rifles on licence.

In 1894 the weapon was adopted as army rifle for the Norwegian Army. The weapon was in service until World War II.

"The Krag" became Norway's first large-scale industrial export and helped to establish an important relationship with the U.S. military.

1900–1945: Modernization

The Krag–Jørgensen rifle dominated production at Kongsberg until the end of World War I. When the war was over there was a significant decline in military orders. The company therefore used its position and expertise from the defence industry to enter new markets and seek new business opportunities.

Production of civilian products such as civil weapons, tools, and parts for the shipping industry and whaling fleet began 1918. Other departments made bicycle components, while the cannon department made shafts, connecting rods, forgings and whale guns.

Kongsberg launched its first civil products in 1921. The products won gold medal at the World Exposition in Barcelona in 1929.

During World War II Kongsberg was under German control. Production, however, never came up to such numbers as the occupation forces wanted. This was partly due to access to raw materials, but also resistance among factory workers has also been suspected.

